the universe is growing
when on march the 28th 1949 the great
astrophysicist fred hoyle
who largely single-handedly explained
how the elements of the periodic table
are almost all manufactured in the core
of stars
attempted to mock the idea of an
expanding universe
he did so by calling it the big bang the
jig was up
it was found we are no longer in a
static universe
now we know that not only is the
universe getting bigger
but the rate at which it's doing so is
increasing
as though trapped in perpetual
adolescence
now i should just pause here to remind
people that
fred hoyle is often mocked himself
for mocking the big bang he
died thinking of a static universe and
people sometimes
remember him solely for that fred hoyle
was
an astrophysics genius he is
one of the most accomplished
astrophysicists ever
because he almost single-handedly
explained
how all the elements on the periodic
table are manufactured in the core of
stars
he explained stellar nucleosynthesis it
was an amazing
feat if you're interested go looking at
what fred hoyle contributed
to astrophysics it's astonishing and he
need not be
remembered solely for getting the big
bang wrong perhaps
but he was wrong about the big bang and
now we know a lot about the big bang
because we have a relatively new science
of
precision cosmology and it brings us not
only a picture of a universe where space
is growing
but where the amount of matter both seen
and unseen
is at once vast and yet dwarfed by an
even greater quantity of energy
that drives the accelerating expansion
it would appear therefore
that the contents of the universe for
all practical purposes
are indeed infinite that's just a
scientific fact
and although the fine details are subtle
and open to debate
there is at least an argument that can
be made given both
the expansion of space and the dark
energy driving the acceleration
that the capacity to do work in the
universe
is likewise increasing without bound
so far as we know we people here on
earth may be the only things in the
universe
looking out on the rest of it and
attempting to form theories about it
for more on that see a podcast that has
been released
almost simultaneously with this one
about the possibility of intelligent
alien life out there
it may be the case that we may be the
only place in the universe
where knowledge of the universe is being
created as david deutch has pointed out
both in his talks and in his books
this place and no other is a special hub
in one respect we are in the outer
suburbs of a typical galaxy
among hundreds of billions but on the
other
we are a central hub of knowledge
creation which contains
an increasingly high resolution
explanatory reflection
of the whole rest of the universe and
all of its contents
from the smallest to the largest scales
when we think of the word
home do we think of our personal
resonance only
what do we think of our town or nation
do we think of our planet
all of these are actually exceedingly
and needlessly
narrow ways of conceiving of our place
in the cosmos
for our home in truth is the universe
the whole universe is the environment
that we find ourselves in
our residence along with the rest of
civilization is our bulwark against the
rest of the environment around us
which is terribly hostile both to us and
every other life form on the planet
of course we may not be alone and may
yet discover that we share this
cosmological environment with others
but we do not know about them whoever
they are and wherever they might be
we can know little about them for now
but we
can constrain some of their properties
whoever they are they may not transgress
the laws of physics
and if they are capable of creating a
civilization then they possess
one very special property that we do too
the ability
to uncover those physical laws that
govern them
as much as us and the rest of the
universe so they too
like we can form ideas especially in the
form of technology
which make clever use of those laws to
control the matter and energy within the
universe to do
good work good work which is absolutely
vital to survival in the face of all
sorts of evils
found in an unfriendly universe evil
which we define as
harmful problems we do not yet have
solutions for
the good work that people do comes in
many forms
we provide food to ourselves and each
other supporting more people in good
health now than ever before
we build structures to protect us from a
terribly hostile environment
we're the only species to routinely
attempt
to protect the diversity of other
species often at great cost to ourselves
rather than viewing almost all other
life forms as competition
we have flown free in very large part
from what our genes
code for our minds think beyond our own
mere self-interest
they can think and overcome genetic
desires with ease
indeed our minds can stretch the very
limits of physical law
and within the abstract world of our
imaginations can even easily exceed what
physics allows to occur in the physical
world
yet for all this infinite mental
capacity that people possess
we encounter a continuous stream of
threats
to both our happiness and even our very
existence
sometimes we need to protect ourselves
against each other and that requires us
to make progress
faster than those who would seek to do
us harm we find solutions to all manner
of problems
and in doing so uncover new problems
that are better to solve than the ones
that went before
think for example that the solution we
found
to the problem of what caused disease
led to the solution of germ theory which
opened up the problem
of how to kill germs which led to the
solution of antibiotics which opened up
the problem of how to compact resistant
strains of bacteria
and so on it goes on and on
problem solution better problem better
solution
but the creation of knowledge requires
resources the creation of knowledge
finding the solutions to the most
pressing problems requires us to
transform matter
from one form into another the problem
of how to keep warm
requires us to take the raw material of
cotton or fur and turn it into coats and
socks
and it requires us to take energy from
one place to create heat in another
place
often by burning some otherwise useless
material like dead wood or buried oil
to solve problems faster still we
increasingly need computers to do some
of the laborious drudge work
and computers require energy too that
energy could come from the sun
but if you want to work at night then
you need to store that energy somehow
and that might take some fancy chemicals
that require mining and more electricity
and more fuel and more specialized
equipment
especially if you want to do it fast and
to make the whole cycle work better
one needs to make improvements to create
knowledge again which requires more
resources and so on the cycle of
discover and gather a resource use it
for fuel and facilitate knowledge
creation
discover and gather new resources to
improve the old then
must continue indefinitely because any
almost
single resource is finite even if
resources in general
are infinite as david deutsch has
observed in the beginning of infinity
nothing whatsoever is a resource until
someone has the knowledge of how to use
it there are parts of the universe
around us today
that we must walk past and regard as
completely worthless
which at any moment some new piece of
scientific knowledge could transform
into a valuable commodity a rock is just
a useless rock until someone figures out
how to get the minerals out of it
the vast salt lake of eugene bolivia was
little more than a tourist attraction
and source of well almost worthless salt
for food flavoring
until someone invented the lithium
battery the lithium
in modern batteries found in computers
and mobile devices
comes from salt water or salt lakes and
in rare cases rocks
and the extraction is no easy process it
too requires both lots of knowledge and
lots of energy
and very specialized equipment knowledge
instantiated
in resources half of the known lithium
on earth
is found in otherwise extremely poor
bolivia a country in south america a
country that has been called
a pauper on a king's throne long before
its lithium deposits were known about
bolivia should hurry to extract as much
lithium as it can
and sell it fast to the best price it
can get for that lithium will power the
computers of the foreseeable future
upon which some child bolivian perhaps
who gets cheap internet access
for the first time learns about physics
and electrochemistry
and discovers a superior material or
alternative technique to lithium
batteries for storing energy and
computers and when that happens
all that wealth that bolivia now
possesses in the form of lithium
will lose its value like so much
asbestos did when the scientific
knowledge changed
the value of that commodity sadly for
now for bolivia
a succession of nationalist and
socialist governments
have for decades stymied progress on
this front
bolivians may very well miss the boat as
they have on so many occasions
while governments argue about
nationalising resources
or worry excessively about small impacts
on the environment
lithium might not always be as valuable
a resource as it is now
the chance for the bolivian people to
enrich themselves by selling this
mineral
could be lost forever if they don't find
the will to make progress faster
david deutsch in chapter 17
unsustainable of the beginning of
infinity
recalls a personal example of how at
university some decades ago who was told
by some experts in the field
that the end of color display screens
was in sight
at the time all colored screens were of
the cathode ray type
and red pixels required the physics was
absolutely indisputable
the element europium just by
happenstance
this one element when excited by
electricity produced
just the right color but it was in
terribly short supply
when it ran out there would simply be no
way for a cathode ray tube to make red
pixels
no red pixels no color screens and it's
true
no alternative element no way of making
pixels
glow red by that process has been found
to this day
but of course we have red screens of
plenty and cheaper than before
and how because we don't use cathode ray
tubes anymore
now i don't know what else european was
used for today the price could be up or
the price could be down but the point
here is
we simply cannot predict what new
discoveries in science
will completely change a market
what is a scarce and valuable resource
one day
might become useless trash the next so
it went with europium
so it may become with lithium and coal
but we need not fix markets science
fixes the problems of what a resource
is or is not and how the damage of the
use they cause if any
can be mitigated not economic central
planning
even if lithium is never replaced by
something better in batteries
and one might argue that the end is far
from insight for lithium
for it is exceedingly light and reactive
a wonderful combination for a portable
energy source
but this is merely my prophecy it
nonetheless
must one day run out in bolivia and then
we will have to turn elsewhere
the oceans contain much lithium but it's
finite there too of course
but in the universe in the universe it
is the third most abundant substance of
all the big bang created
the universe that we see today and what
precipitated out
from that primeval soup first was
hydrogen and helium
and lithium sure by the abundances of
hydrogen helium the amount of lithium
was just a trace impurity but on the
scale of the universe
it may as well be infinite so far as
humans are concerned
but if we get to the point where we are
able to sweep intercollective space for
lithium
we probably won't need to for if we can
do that we can probably just sweep up
the hydrogen instead and use it in a
fusion reactor
of course today lithium is just one
thing we need
we need lots of other things too and the
earth itself is finite
but the universe is not the universe is
literally infinite
and it is growing and it is hostile
terribly so there are dangers we know of
disease and drought
storms and earthquakes supernovae and
asteroids
gamma-ray bursts and solar flares and
perhaps worst of all
the things we do not know about yet and
so cannot possibly even begin to prepare
for
we are at the beginning of infinity and
we should expect to be startled one
quiet tuesday afternoon
by an event as astounding and
inexplicable as for example
the appearance of a supernova in the
daytime sky was to the ancients
happily those events were not harmful to
our planet so far as we know
and are now relatively well understood
but nothing guarantees there are not
similar strange and lethal phenomena
lurking out there for which we have no
explanation
so what we need is lots of knowledge and
we need to generate it as fast as we can
and to do this we need everyone on board
helping
how they need to solve the problems they
are interested in
as fast as they can so that they can
move on to better
more interesting problems and all of
this takes energy and resources and
typically lots of it
so we need to grow if we don't grow if
the population fails to grow if
civilization fails to grow
if the economy fails to grow then
knowledge will fail to grow
fast enough to meet the challenges of a
growing
hostile universe somehow our rate of
solving the most deadly problems must
exceed the rate at which they confront
us
but that latter rate is not knowable we
cannot know how fast and of what sort
the problems of the coming days or years
will be so we must take david deutsch's
advice we need a stance of problem
solving
not problem avoidance we cannot avoid
problems we cannot avoid
people who suddenly decide and
unexpectedly
to become violent so we need a means of
defense we cannot avoid new strains of
viruses and bacteria that could kill us
so we need a means of quickly finding
antidotes when they do appear
we cannot avoid the next disaster that
is found to be affecting our oceans or
air
so we need a means to reverse the change
and we cannot avoid
what might appear next in the sky so we
need people and institutions engaged in
studying the world
so we can quickly and cheaply determine
if it might be harmful or not
and how to reduce the harm and all of
this is to say we need
lots and lots of resources and energy to
fuel
our problem solving growth is what's
needed not stagnation
those who argue for smaller populations
or smaller economies because they are
parochially concerned about their own
tiny neighborhoods even when that tiny
neighborhood is planet-sized
fail to understand that we cannot
protect ourselves by hibernating upon
the earth
or worse in one small corner of it we
cannot protect
even ourselves let alone our families
endangered species or the environment
because as melodramatic as it might
sound it must be the case
that the day of cosmological reckoning
is coming a problem we have not yet
foreseen
out of the clear blue sky or perhaps the
deep blue sea that could exterminate us
all it has happened to countless species
before us
it could be a solar flare it could be an
asteroid it could be a cosmological
event or it could be a microscopic one
that threatens all life or perhaps just
ours great extinctions have happened
many many times before
why should we be so special well only in
one way
by creating the knowledge to swiftly
deal with what the hostile universe
throws at us
and to do this takes wealth the capacity
to transform the universe
into what we want her as david deutsch
defines the term with more precision
the repertoire of physical
transformations that we would be capable
of causing
wealth requires turning resources into
widgets and technological solutions
and it requires turning useless
materials into resources
and that step takes knowledge but it
must happen quickly
not so quickly as to carelessly cast
aside or caution but quickly enough
that progress in science is matched by
progress and philosophy
of knowing when to pursue some course
rather than the alternatives
some people have always attempted to use
science against science
by arguing that in biology there is such
a thing as carrying capacity
or some analogous idea the finite number
of organisms that some
area of land or some volume of space can
support
given the finite food water or other
resources available
so the argument goes because this lake
is only so big
it can only support so many fish and so
it must be with people
tasmania is only so many square
kilometres so it must be able to support
some limited number of people
but this is false science changes the
numbers continuously
as we learn more about how to support
more people so the carrying capacity for
people
increases people are unique
yet prominent thinkers and public
intellectuals since mathematician thomas
malthus in 1798
have argued that the carrying capacity
for humans on our planet is limited
and they have always been proved wrong
malthus made his prediction based upon a
rigorous mathematical analysis of the
growth of human population
which he rightly knew was exponential
compared to the production of food
which he observed was linear exponential
functions
outraced linear ones and so it seemed
mathematically watertight but sooner or
later
malthus predicted the 1930s that
humankind would reach a tipping point
where
famine would proliferate across the
globe things would get worse he argued
upheaval starvation and finally perhaps
extinction would come
for our species as we were unable to
simply appreciate the logic
that a finite planet could not support a
forever growing population of course
malthus made this prediction over a
century before the harbour process was
discovered
the idea that hydrogen and nitrogen
gases could be used to create ammonia
and sow artificial fertilizer and make
previously barren land
useful as farmland and he made the
prediction before modern irrigation and
genetically engineered crops
in short he attempted to predict the
content
of future scientific discoveries and his
prediction was
there'd be none but we know knowledge
can continue to grow
if we people continue to solve problems
as we always have
it's what we do it's what we are best at
we are
as david deutsch explains universal
problem solvers
whatever the problem if it's interesting
enough it can be solved
and we can solve it but the lesson of
the parable of malthus
has been slow to be learned by our
culture indeed it seems never to have
been learned no matter how many prophets
of durham
have argued in just the same way let's
not catalog a history of errors
but let's just look at one recent and
prominent example
one of the louder voices on the stage
that uses
malthus's arguments just the way that
malthus did now some people watching or
listening to this
outside of australia might never have
heard of dick smith
but he is an australian entrepreneur and
an adventurer
and actually a science popularizer of a
sort
but and he still commands the ear of the
public in australia
and of governments we have our highest
award in australia is called
australian of the year for services to
the community
and once upon a time dick smith was
awarded australian of the year
he has supported green parties and
environmentalists
and attempts to get others into
parliament
on the basis of population control
platforms
he and thinkers like him promote some
version
of the malthusian fallacy populations
are too great
and growth is unsustainable it's very
easy
to get a taste for his pessimism just
google his name dick smith and perhaps
type in
population and of course recently we've
had
prominent people like greta thunderberg
making similar noises on this topic
dick smith calls endless growth idiocy
he writes in an article printed in the
age newspaper
quote no one can confidently predict
where we will find the food energy water
and resources needed to supply even the
basic
needs of so many people end quote
and he's quite right there too no one
can predict
what new scientific discoveries tomorrow
will bring that would be prophecy
but equally no one can predict
confidently or not
that the equivalent of the harbour
process won't be uncovered by a chemist
working diligently
behind a computer screen or in a lab
which would see even
deserts become fertile places to grow
food
turning barren wastelands into
gorgeously green crops is hardly a
challenge that is beyond us
you might even choose to use solar power
to green the desert
just google examples of agriculture in
the negev desert in israel
that's what you can do if you are
optimistic about problems
of course if you think the desert simply
cannot be a place to grow food
or if deserts can't support a human
population
or worse if you think there's nothing we
can do to change the facts about how
much land is needed
to support some number of people you are
liable
not to search for solutions you are
liable instead to call for restraints on
freedom
minds that have been decided to imprison
themselves inside static walls and
unwilling to consider options
are liable to not want other minds to be
freed to consider solutions either
indeed they are liable to call such
minds idiotic
or worse what these minds want to do
is to suppress the very means of making
progress they want to call into question
the very project of even considering
how progress and therefore knowledge
growth can be unbounded
they want to label as wrong or even evil
the very good
optimistic philosophy that to solve
problems we must increase our knowledge
our resources
and therefore our people for people are
themselves
resources of creativity and new
knowledge they are the ultimate resource
people more people to do creative work
solve the problems of humanity faster
they are not the problem
as people like dick smith see but the
solution
people are the solution problem
is the hostile world around us and we
need to do what we can
to understand and thereby control it so
we can protect the parts of it we care
about
like ourselves now dick smith is very
concerned in his book and his articles
about how
finite the planet is many people today
are
it is the common opinion of
intellectuals in this space
that the finite size of the planet is an
important problem that we have to
confront
that the global community must confront
and it is trivially true
of course it's true that the planet is
finite many things are finite your house
is finite in size your nation is finer
the planet is finite
depending upon how you define it the
solar system is finite by definition any
100 square meter block of land is finite
but finiteness of physical size is not
much of a guide to anything unless you
have some further assumptions
consider for a moment how many people
can fit on a 100 square meter block of
land
how many let's just guess for a moment
pause and think imagine each person
needs one square meter to be comfortable
how many
a hundred well you need an assumption to
get to that answer
everything turns on how creative you
might be in coming up with an answer
how many dimensions one is thinking in
certainly has a bearing skyscrapers fit
many more people than you can expect on
100 square meters of land
so might underground car parks whatever
limit you think there is depends
entirely upon what assumptions you are
making
and what effect knowledge might have on
the problem
whatever the number is it's liable to
change but let us stick to the point
malthus in 1798 and dick smith in 2011
and beyond are agitated by all these
people
possibly stacked one on top of another
in apartment blocks need food and
resources to survive
oh no what now what a terrible
predicament we are in
the knowledge that enables us to stack
people up is just exacerbating things
well no again however much land you need
to grow food is itself
subject to change far less people work
in farming now than ever before but they
can grow on the same land
food to feed many many many times more
people than ever before
but the amount of land is fine up for
growing food breath don't you understand
fine we haven't shown any sign of
running short of farming land to feed
everyone and as i like to imagine there
could be skyscrapers of a sort for
growing food anyway
food like any other resource we might
want evolves and what was once finite
might become infinite
imagine if we found usable energy not
only in sunlight but in empty space we
know it's there
but we don't know how to use it it's
very hard to estimate how many resources
how many people on how much land might
require the numbers
change with every new discovery yet
whole political parties are now in large
part devoted
to the very idea that people are the
problem
and nature is the solution they are
concerned about things like the
carrying capacity of the planet and the
destruction of the environment by people
the truth is these same people should be
concerned about the destruction of
people by the planet
the uncaring soulless mindless
environment it is forever thoughtlessly
flooding burning infecting blasting
starving
drowning suffocating freezing or
otherwise maiming or killing the loving
caring and creative people that eek out
in existence
on its hostile surface now personally i
do care about gorgeous rivers and
forests
birds trees and koalas i really do i
love to
hike and run and swim when i can in what
i think of as the beauty of nature
but we can preserve some places for some
creatures
and ourselves of natural beauty without
risking the existence of it all
people are not evil but some ideas are
and some
problems are the source of great
suffering and those problems come from
our environment
as much as from our fellow inhabitants
of this planet and despite what some
scientists say
no life on this planet would not be fine
without us
even the bacteria cannot flourish into
the indefinite future without us
without the knowledge that humans have
the bacteria like the cockroaches
and everything else on the planet even
the planet itself will
be destroyed it will be engulfed by the
dying sun
as every astronomer who has ever had a
podium has told us
so the difference between whether we and
all other life on this earth survives
it's not a matter of whether we will
exterminate it
we don't have the means to exterminate
at all but whether the environment will
and even if we think the death of the
sun is too far off for greenpeace to be
concerned about
there is still the matter of all the
other kinds of purely natural disasters
that will kill our fellow travelers as
much as us
all those treasured dolphins tigers
whales and wolves of the wild
cannot themselves solve the problem of
dolphin viruses
droughts that kill wolves or floods that
kill tigers
yet some people do silly things like
killing almost extinct rhinos to harvest
a horn
that has absolutely none of the
purported superstitious uses whatsoever
but the solution to these types of
problems is not to blame the growth of
civilization
but to bemoan the lack of civilization
and civilized ideas
in the minds of some people we need more
civilization in some places
not less if you want to save the rhinos
or the whales or whatever else
then it is scientific and
philosophically enlightened ideas that
are needed
not the stagnation of growth the cosmos
is an infinite place
literally it contains infinite resources
literally and what is a resource changes
as our knowledge grows
and the growth of knowledge is unbounded
but we need to fuel the growth of
knowledge
that takes a mixture of energy which
requires resources and
freedom to provide the environment in
which creativity can flourish
but forces are arrayed against us
anytime someone calls for restraints on
freedom
by arguing for less creativity anytime
someone argues
against the wise use of some resource
they are arguing against that which
fuels the growth of knowledge
those forces have always been with us
and so then must be the response
freedom and resources need to be
maximized to find solutions to the most
pressing problems
as fast as possible so that knowledge
grows without this
then because problems are inevitable it
is possible that a problem will arise
from the clear blue sky that will have
insufficient knowledge to solve it in
insufficient time
so if someone argues for us to slow down
or
stop growing or restrict or take
precautions take it personally
because that speed hump might just be
the one that causes us to miss the
chance
to save one life or many or find the
solution
to what some better resource might be or
some way to support more people
more cheaply on even less land with less
resources
what is wisdom today may be foolishness
tomorrow
once it was known that penicillin should
be used to cure bacterial infections
today that could be considered terrible
foolishness given how many other
antibiotics there are
and more properly suited to particular
infections than penicillin ever was
one day it could be the case that
resistant strains of bacteria
make all penicillin stocks in the world
rather useless so what is a resource
today
may not be a resource tomorrow problems
evolve
as indeed knowledge does because the
world is not static
and people are constantly making
progress at a rate that is faster or
slower
depending upon the conditions they find
themselves in what changes useless
matter into a valuable resource
is knowledge and that must continue to
grow
but the growth of knowledge depends upon
intelligently designed
creativity that is to say the unique
capacity of human minds
and as karl popper has taught us we are
all equal in our infinite
ignorance what is before us all is a
constantly growing horizon
which brings into focus ever more
clearly the reality
in which we find ourselves but we need
help we can't do it all alone
we need each other we need more people
not less
of course not so many that we all begin
to suffer
but no one is suggesting that more
people like me
saying this and you listening to this
that have the wealth
the electricity the energy and the
information to create the knowledge we
all need
so let us grow wealth and populations
so that we may grow knowledge knowledge
forms a web where the solutions that are
found
by one person in one area can have a
profound effect upon the problems
encountered by someone else
in a completely different area for
though we cannot know
what sort it will be we do know that one
day
a problem is coming that will either
newly compete with or perhaps even dwarf
our present concerns
about climate change viruses
terrorism whether ai will take our jobs
etc
and so on problems are inevitable
and when that day comes of this super
problem that dwarfs all others
we want to hope that we have put all the
resources
at our disposal into the hands of the
problem solvers of the planet
for problems are soluble but only if we
create the knowledge